## Difference between Development and Release modes

### Dev: 
- it is still possible to flash new plaintext firmware to the device, and the bootloader will transparently encrypt this firmware using the key stored in hardware. This allows, indirectly, to read out the plaintext of the firmware in flash.
- firmware bootloader allows the UART bootloader to re-flash encrypted binaries. Also, the `SPI_BOOT_CRYPT_CNT` eFuse bits are NOT write-protected. In addition, the firmware bootloader by default sets the eFuse bits `DIS_DOWNLOAD_ICACHE`, `DIS_PAD_JTAG`, `DIS_USB_JTAG` and `DIS_LEGACY_SPI_BOOT`

### Release: 
- flashing plaintext firmware to the device without knowing the encryption key is no longer possible
- the firmware bootloader sets all the eFuse bits set under development mode as well as `DIS_DOWNLOAD_MANUAL_ENCRYPT`. It also write-protects the `SPI_BOOT_CRYPT_CNT` eFuse bits. To modify this behavior, see Enabling UART Bootloader Encryption/Decryption.

## Using Host-generated key 

1. Generate and flashing random key in EFUSE:
```
espsecure.py generate_flash_encryption_key my_flash_encryption_key.bin
```  

2. Before the first encrypted boot, burn the key into your device's eFuse using the command below.  
**!!!This action can be done only once!!!**  
```
espefuse.py --port PORT burn_key BLOCK my_flash_encryption_key.bin XTS_AES_128_KEY
```
where BLOCK is a free keyblock between BLOCK_KEY0 and BLOCK_KEY5.

If the key is not burned and the device is started after enabling flash encryption, the ESP32-C3/S3 will generate a random key that software cannot access or modify.

* AES-128 uses a 256-bit key (32 bytes) derived from 128 bits (16 bytes) burned in half Efuse key block. Internally, it calculates SHA256(128 bits)
* AES-128 uses a 256-bit key (32 bytes) which occupies one Efuse key block.


3. In Project Configuration Menu, do the following:

* Enable flash encryption on boot
* Select encryption mode (Development mode by default)
* Select the appropriate bootloader log verbosity
* Save the configuration and exit.

Enabling flash encryption will increase the size of bootloader, which might require updating partition table offset. See Bootloader Size.

4. Use pre-generated XTS encryption keys:

This method will be required by the user when the `XTS encryption keys` in [NVS key partition](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/api-reference/storage/nvs_flash.html#nvs-key-partition) are not generated by the application.
The pre generated `Sample XTS encryption keys` can be stored on the flash with help of the following two commands

i) Build and flash the partition table:
```
idf.py partition-table partition-table-flash
```

ii) Store the `my_flash_encryption_key.bin` in the `nvs_key`partition (on the flash) with the help of [parttool.py](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/api-guides/partition-tables.html#partition-tool-parttool-py):
```
parttool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 --partition-table-offset 0x9000 write_partition --partition-name="nvs_key" --input my_flash_encryption_key.bin
```

The sample [NVS key partition](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/api-reference/storage/nvs_flash.html#nvs-key-partition) partition used in this example is generated with the help of [NVS Partition Generator Utility](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/api-reference/storage/nvs_partition_gen.html#nvs-partition-generator-utility)

